Admin: Colorspace management (#42)
ynput/ayon-documentation: website/docs/admin_colorspace.md

---
id: admin_colorspace
title: Colorspace settings
sidebar_label: Colorspace settings
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

:::important Actual limitations

This is a work in progress. The current implementation is a bit limited and will be improved in the future.
Currently only limited amount of hosts are supported and only publishing is implemented. Loading is not yet supported.

:::

## Key concept of colorspace distribution

### Host groups
![hosts](assets/settings/admin_colorspace_1.png)

Hosts are divided into 3 groups regarding the level of control of a DCC's native colorspace manageability.

1. **OCIO managed** - This application's colorspace management can be controlled through OpenPype settings. Specifically, the configured OpenColorIO (OCIO) config path is utilized in the application's workfile. Additionally, the File Rules feature can be leveraged for both publishing and loading procedures.

> 2. **Remapped internal colorspace** - This application includes internal color management functionality, but it does not offer external control over this feature. To address this limitation, OpenPype uses mapping rules to remap the native colorspace names used in the internal color management system to the OpenColorIO (OCIO) color management system. Remapping feature is used in Publishing and Loading procedures.

Author: Yes, good point.

3. **Derived colorspace** - This application does not include any built-in color management capabilities, OpenPype offers a solution to this limitation by deriving valid colorspace names for the OpenColorIO (OCIO) color management system from file paths, using File Rules feature (publishing only).

> ### How does hosts overrides work

Author: > I think it's also good to move this chapter down so that the "global setting" for color management is discussed first and it must be absolutely clear to the user that host or global settings do nothing unless the global color management setting is enabled. Right?

This is in the **key concept** category and configuration section with global and host sub categories follow, so I would keep the order as it is.

:::

### Config order
![admin_colorspace_settings_global](assets/settings/admin_colorspace_settings_global_3.png)

It's worth noting that the order in which the configuration paths are defined matters, with higher priority given to paths listed earlier in the configuration list. In the example image above, the production team decided to switch a project to use the `nuke-default` ([v1, linear, sRGB, rec709](https://opencolorio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/configurations/nuke_default.html)) OCIO config. This implies that all hosts will implement this config for publishing and loading within the [mentioned scope](admin_colorspace#how-does-colorspace-distribution-work-at-host-level).

### Project level config
![admin_colorspace_settings_global](assets/settings/admin_colorspace_settings_global_2.png)

To avoid potential issues, ensure that the OCIO configuration path is not an absolute path and includes at least
the root token (Anatomy). This helps ensure that the configuration path remains valid across different environments and
avoids any hard-coding of paths that may be specific to one particular system.

> The example image above shows project level OCIO config file. This way the production is securing that any future changes on studio OCIO config file will not break any of old projects. It is recommended to use the project's OCIO config as starting point for all derivations of host level OCIO configs.

Reviewer: Also, should we note somewhere that OP by default does not deploy these files? So a remote working artist would require these files to exist in these locations as well. Something site sync does not do!

### Activating file rules

> File rules are disabled by default. Once it is enabled it is applied to all hosts. It is possible to override them at the [host level](admin_colorspace#configuration-of-host-settings).

Reviewer: After reading this I'm still in doubt whether a host specific setting can override the enabled state for the file rules. If I disable this checkbox in Global does Override file rules do anything inside the Host specific settings? I still get confused by this.

I feel like in settings this might also benefit a label that it's a global override to ALL file rules, both at the global level and the application settings.

It's funny because in **file rules override** below this IS explained. These two should **definitely** be merged into one. So that the statement:

> If global File rules are disabled, the host-level File rules are ignored.

Is here.

We recommend using the `description` field to store information about the changes made to the OCIO config file. The file is in YAML format, and it's possible to use multiple lines in the `description` field only if `|` is used at the end of the line. Additionally, we add the `origin` and `changes` fields to the file. This allows you to track the origin of the OCIO config file and the changes made to it.

### File rules override
![admin_colorspace_settings_host_filerules](assets/settings/admin_colorspace_settings_host_filerules_1.png)

If global File rules are disabled, the host-level File rules are ignored.

## Upgrading from previous versions
Upgrading may not always be a straightforward process, and we understand that its complexity can be frustrating. We strive to keep the upgrade process as simple as possible and to avoid any breaking changes. However, sometimes it's not possible, and we may need to introduce some breaking changes. This section aims to help you understand what needs to be done after the upgrade.

### 1. Example of usage - [DCCs](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms) are set to native linear rec709 colorspace

#### Actual configuration:

> A studio is having on-going production with project configured imageio at op 3.15. All hosts are set to `linear rec709` space with following combination of settings:

Reviewer: Note that "is having" isn't typical english grammar. I'd replace all of them with `has` or `have` or `was` depending on the case. I'm not commenting them individually because there's quite a few of them.

> A studio is having on-going production with project configured imageio at op 3.15. All hosts are set to `linear rec709` space with following combination of settings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A studio has an on-going production with a project configured imageio using OpenPype version 3.15. All hosts are set to `linear rec709` space with following combination of settings:
```

Better to be clear than to imply certain words like "op" being "OpenPype", etc.

> - Nuke host [**CMS**](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms) custom config was not activated and it was used as `nuke-default`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Nuke host [**CMS**](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms) custom config was not activated and it used `nuke-default`
```

> - Maya was set to internal ocio config in v2 `maya-scene-linear-rec709`

Reviewer: Just reading this I'm not sure where to look in settings currently to know what my settings are set to to know whether I match this case exactly for my production. For example with the OCIO color management setting enabled I see these defaults:

![image](https://github.com/ynput/ayon-documentation/assets/2439881/eb815d49-77f4-4e61-82ba-960a576e9cb8)

You mention v2  but no v2 default setting - you also don't mention the legacy v1 default value either. It's quite unclear to me what to look at.

- Global imageio custom config was set to `nuke-default`

#### Required action after the upgrade:
No need to do anything. Be aware that once the Global [**CMS**](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms) is enabled, the default config is set to `aces_1.2` and it will be applied to all hosts. If you want to keep the same behavior as before the upgrade, you need to set the Global [**CMS**](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms) to `nuke-default` config or disable it.

### 2. Example of usage - [DCCs](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms) are set to native ACES OCIO config
#### Actual configuration:
A studio is having on-going production with project configured imageio at op 3.15. All hosts are set to `ACES 1.2` space with following combination of settings:

>    - Nuke host [**CMS**](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms) custom config was not activated and it was used OCIO with provided `aces_1.2`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Nuke host [**CMS**](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms) custom config was not activated and it used OCIO with provided `aces_1.2`
```

### 3. Example of usage - Global custom ocio config used
#### Actual configuration:
A studio is having on-going production with project configured imageio at op 3.15. All hosts are set to custom config path via OCIO env var with following combination of settings:
   - Nuke host [**CMS**](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms) is having defined creator nodes to corresponding colorspace name found in provided OCIO config
   - Maya is having activated OCIO v2 via OCIO env var and it is using provided OCIO config
   - Global File rules were defined to:
        - capture all render family subsets to be **acescg** colorspace
        - capture all plates family subsets to be **acescc** colorspace
        - capture all mp4 extensions to be **Output Rec.709** colorspace

#### Required action after the upgrade:
1. Enable Global [**CMS**](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms).

> 2. Add Studio OCIO config into any folder within Root defined storage.

Reviewer: > into any folder within Root defined storage.

This technically is NOT a requirement. It just needs to be accessible by all machines. It could also contain a global environment variable, right? Or in a windows only single physical location studio it could technically be even a single network path.

This is much better described as "Set the global OCIO config" and potentially mention to 'as per the recommended method' and then linking to that section of what to keep in mind.

Author: Yes not required and the new text will mention it.

> 3. Add path to the project config into Global [**CMS**](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms) or host config paths to first position from top. Path should not be absolute and should point at Anatomy root storage template - a.g. `{root[work]}/configs/ocio/aces_1.2/config.ocio`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Add path to the project config into Global [**CMS**](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms) or host config paths to first position from top. Path should not be absolute and should point at Anatomy root storage template - e.g. `{root[work]}/configs/ocio/aces_1.2/config.ocio`
```
OR
```suggestion
3. Add path to the project config into Global [**CMS**](admin_colorspace#used-acronyms) or host config paths to first position from top. Path should not be absolute and should point at Anatomy root storage template - for example `{root[work]}/configs/ocio/aces_1.2/config.ocio`
```

4. Enable Global File rules.

### Used acronyms:

> -  **CMS**: Color Management Settings

Reviewer: I wouldn't abbreviate CMS in the above cases. I feel like the above sentences are much clearer with the full wording present.

> -  **DCC**: Digital Content Creation software

Reviewer: To be completely clear I feel all of these should be in a subchapter: **Upgrade from 3.15** so it's clear it is related to upgrading from that version.
